content/index_intro/index.md, before:

---
headless: true
date: 2021-04-17
---

LFortran is a modern open-source (BSD licensed) interactive Fortran compiler
built on top of LLVM. It can execute user's code interactively to allow
exploratory work (much like Python, MATLAB or Julia) as well as compile to
binaries with the goal to run user's code on modern architectures such as
multi-core CPUs and GPUs.

LFortran is in development (alpha stage), and as of spring 2023 we are able to
compile and run both legacy and modern Minpack, see the following blog post for
more information:
[LFortran Breakthrough: Now Building Legacy and Modern Minpack](/blog/2023/05/lfortran-breakthrough-now-building-legacy-and-modern-minpack/).

Main repository at GitHub:
[https://github.com/lfortran/lfortran](https://github.com/lfortran/lfortran)
{{< github_lfortran_button >}}

Try LFortran in your browser using WebAssembly: https://dev.lfortran.org/

Twitter: [@lfortranorg](https://twitter.com/lfortranorg)  
Any questions? Ask us on Zulip [![project chat](https://img.shields.io/badge/zulip-join_chat-brightgreen.svg)](https://lfortran.zulipchat.com/)
or our [mailing list](https://groups.io/g/lfortran). You can also use the
Fortran Discourse [forum](https://fortran-lang.discourse.group).

Commit message:

Update source files as per LPython

content/index_intro/index.md, after:

---
headless: true
date: 2023-07-28
---

LPython is a Python compiler that aims to provide optimized machine code by compiling type-annotated Python code. It offers several backends, including LLVM, C, C++, and WASM, which allow it to generate code into multiple target languages simultaneously. LPython's main focus is on speed and performance, and it achieves this through various features and optimizations.

LPython is still in development (alpha stage) and may evolve further to encompass more extensive Python code and additional optimizations.
[LPython: Making Python faster with LLVM](/blog/2023/05/lpython-making-python-faster-with-llvm/).

Main repository at GitHub:
[https://github.com/lcompilers/lpython](https://github.com/lcompilers/lpython)
{{< github_lpython_button >}}

Try LPython in your browser using WebAssembly: https://dev.lpython.org/

Twitter: [@lfortranorg](https://twitter.com/lfortranorg)  
Any questions? Ask us on Zulip [![project chat](https://img.shields.io/badge/zulip-join_chat-brightgreen.svg)](https://lfortran.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/311866-LPython).
